---
layout: post
title: "SIGPIPE, EPIPE"
date: 2019-01-17 08:20:00  +0100
categories: linux c
tags: pipe
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

If you run the following shell script, it will terminate:

```sh
seq | head -n 1
```

But why?

<!--more-->

The command from above creates two processes, which are connected by a [pipe](man:pipe(2)).
`seq` writes its infinite sequence of numbers to `STDOUT`, while `head` reads the other end of the pipe as `STDIN`.
It reads the first line and then exits.
But what stops `seq` from running until the collapse of the universe?

The Linux kernel only allocates a finite sized buffer for that pipe.
The size of that buffer changed over time from *4 KiB* to *64 KiB* to *configurable*, but still defaults to 1 MiB.
See [pipe](man:pipe(7)) for more details about the getting the size.

After `seq` filled up that buffer its next call to [write](man:write(2)) will block until the reader has read some data and thus has freed some space in the buffer.
But as soon as `head` terminated, there will never be any other reader who can do that.
The Linux kernel thus sends `SIGPIPE` to `seq` to signal it, that no reader is left.
The default action for that signal is *terminate* the process.

## Inheritance

Now what happens when we do that instead:

```sh
seq | ( sleep 1m & head -n 1)
```

Eventually that will also terminate:

* Both processes `sleep` and `head` (and also the intermediate `$SHELL`) inherited the pipe as their `STDIN`.
* The `head` process will terminate after it has done its job of reading and printing the first line.
* But the `sleep` process will stay around for one minute and will remain an **possible** reader.
* As such the `seq` process will only get killed through `SIGPIPE` when **all** readers finally terminated.

This is important when you write a daemon, which forks into the background:
It should close all inherited file descriptors as to not function as a **potential** reader to any inherited pipe.
(I fixed at least one such problem in the *Apache Web Server*, where it did not do that correctly:
It kept open a pipe used by the *System-V init* script used to start it.)

## Sockets

Now lets take a look at some simple TCP server:

```python
import socket
s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
s.bind(('localhost', 12345))
s.listen(1)
conn, addr = s.accept()  # blocks
conn.shutdown(socket.SHUT_RDWR)
conn.close()
s.close()
```

And here the corresponding TCP client:

```python
import time
import socket
s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
s.connect(('localhost', 12345))
time.sleep(1)
s.sendall('Hello' * 1000)
```

You might already have guessed it:
It will also terminate with the Python equivalent of `SIGPIPE`:

```
socket.error: [Errno 32] Broken pipe
```

This also can happen when you use some libraries, which communicate with servers and that connection suddenly breaks.
One example is [Debian Bug #190072](https://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/bugreport.cgi?bug=190072):
On a system using *LDAP* as back-end for [getent](man:getent(1)) *NSS* uses *libldap* to open a connection to the LDAP server.
Internally it uses *liblber* for serializing the data, which uses [write](man:write(2)) to send its data.
If something goes wrong their, your process will get `SIGPIPE` and terminate.
(I recently fixed such a bug in *Univention Directory Notifier*, where the process got terminated when the OpenLDAP server closed the connection due to some timeout.)

## Mitigation

1. You can use [send](man:send(2)) instead of [write](man:write(2)), where you can specify `flags=MSG_NOSIGNAL` to get `errno=EPIPE` instead of being killed by `SIGPIPE`.
   (*liblber* cannot be changed as it also is supposed to work on local files, where [send](man:send(2)) would not work.)

2. [pipe](man:pipe(7)) has this interesting sentence:

   > If the calling process is ignoring `SIGPIPE`, then [write](man:write(2)) fails with the error `EPIPE`.

   So using the following code *should* work:

   ```c
   #include <signal.h>

   struct sigaction oldact, act = {
       .sa_handler = SIG_IGN,
       .sa_flags = 0,
   };
   sigaction(SIGPIPE, &act, &oldact);
   // call LDAP functions here ...
   sigaction(SIGPIPE, &oldact, NULL);
   ```

   (I skipped calling [sigemptyset](man:sigemptyset(3)) here as the structure is zero-filled by the C compiler.)

   This has the draw-back that also all other calls to [write](man:write(2)) will return `EPIPE` instead of getting a `SIGPIPE`.
   So you have to be careful if you use other libraries in between or write lots of output and expect your program to get terminated when used in a pipe.

## Example

Here is some simple C program for your tests.
It defaults to signal handling, but ignores `SIGPIPE` when called with any command line argument not equal `0`.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdbool.h>
#include <signal.h>
#include <unistd.h>

static void handler(int sig) {
	struct sigaction act = {
		.sa_handler = SIG_DFL,
		.sa_flags = 0,
	};
	sigaction(sig, &act, NULL);
	printf("Got signal %d\n", sig);
	kill(getpid(), sig);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
	int pipefd[2];
	bool ignore = argc > 1 && argv[1][0] != '0';

	struct sigaction oldact, act = {
		.sa_handler = ignore ? SIG_IGN : handler,
		.sa_flags = 0,
	};
	sigaction(SIGPIPE, &act, &oldact);

	pipe(pipefd);
	close(pipefd[0]); // reader
	if (write(pipefd[1], "Hello", 6) < 0)
		perror("write()");

	sigaction(SIGPIPE, &oldact, NULL);
	return 0;
}
```

{% include abbreviations.md %}
